 <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">

# An Open Letter in Response to NSF 20-587 (Graduate Research Fellowship Program)
**July 30, 2020**

**DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT DRAFT**

To:

Dr. Sethuraman Panchanathan, Director National Science Foundation,
Dr. Ellen Ochoa (Chair), and the members of the National Science Board
CC: NSF GRFP Program officers: Drs. Jong-on Hahm, Christopher Hill, and Narcrisha S. Norman

----

Dear NSF Leadership, and program officers of the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
Program,

We write to you as members of the scientific community concerned about the
recent Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP) solicitation 20-587.
Specifically, we are troubled by the following revision (4) and its implications:

    “[I]n FY2021, GRFP will emphasize three high priority research areas in
    alignment with NSF goals. These areas are Artificial Intelligence, Quantum
    Information Science, and Computationally Intensive Research. Applications
    are encouraged in all disciplines supported by NSF that incorporate these
    high priority research areas.”

The GRFP is one of the most prestigious NSF awards and has been the starting
point for many of the US’s leading scientists. NSF’s state purpose for the GRFP
is to “help ensure the quality, vitality, and diversity of the scientific and
engineering workforce of the United States.” We, the authors and signatories to
this letter, believe in this purpose and the ensuing special obligation to the
highest standards for inclusion, equity, and diversity. We are writing to you
as we believe this prioritization is contrary to the program’s goals and harmful.

**Why this revision amplifies existing inequity**

Although we fully embrace the importance of computationally-driven technologies
in the sciences, the digital divide hinders access to these technologies for
many potential GRFP applicants. An emphasis on technologies some applicants
simply will not have equal access to is an additional hindrance to these
applicants at the very start of their careers.
The consensus of research and reports funded or written by NSF, National
Science Board, and the US National Academies of Science Engineering and Medicine
(including annotated examples and references following this letter) make it
clear that minoritized students including people of color, women, rural
students, and others don’t enjoy access or exposure to the areas GRFP would now
prioritize. We believe the use of these high-priority research areas will
further contribute to the concentration of GRFP awards to students who attend a
small handful of predominantly white, exclusionary selective undergraduate
institutions and further limit applications and awards from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCU), Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs), and
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). The GRFP has already come under public
scrutiny with Science reporting that just 10 schools represented 31% of 2019
grants.  It’s difficult to imagine how GRFP will ever be a possibility for a
young researcher at a tribal college without access to internet at home, a Black
student at an under-resourced HBCU, or a woman veteran working on her PhD
remotely who don’t have the same access to course work and institutional support
in artificial intelligence, quantum information science, or other
“computationally-driven technologies” as students at Research I universities.
Furthermore, such research areas may further disenfranchise students from
underrepresented communities who have concerns about these data-driven
technologies (and whose communities are disproportionately affected by these
technologies e.g. via policing and surveillance, to name one example).

**The problem with the term “emphasis” and the appeal to “merit”**

Although the term “emphasis” might seem neutral, the ongoing petition at
change.org (https://www.change.org/p/national-science-foundation-remove-priority-research-areas-from-nsf-grfp?, more than 2,500 signatures) and the multitude of comments there and on social
media make it clear that many read this emphasis as a requirement they cannot
meet or an advantage they have not participated in. We also find the tweet
issued by NSF (https://twitter.com/NSF/status/1288082834574409728 )
insufficient. Besides the low likelihood that applicants or reviewers will
receive this guidance since the solicitation itself has not been updated, merit
is not the issue. We believe that given a level playing field all students
should have the opportunity to submit meritorious applications.

**How to remedy this harm**

To remedy this harm, we strongly urge you to drop revision 4 from the
solicitation. The GRFP has always been about “investing in the person”, not a
particular and highly specialized approach to investigation. As it stands, very
few students will be positioned as undergraduates to proposed sophisticated ML
or quantum computing projects and  this emphasis may have the effect of lowering
the quality of applications as students try to conform their proposals to
incorporate approaches that are inappropriate or premature.  In addition,
avoiding special emphasis in GRFP allows this program to better align with the
strong basic research mission of NSF and sends the message that all modes of
investigation (computationally intensive or not) have the potential to advance
knowledge.

We hope that NSF will consider concrete ways it can serve GRFP recipients and
the scientific community at large by investing in the training and education
which will help all students have access to computational skills.  For example,
the NSF GRFP should create opportunities for award recipients to develop
computational skills, akin to the existing GRIP and GROW programs.
The corresponding letter author and co-authors as well as others o signatories
are happy to help present community perspectives and solutions we hope could
improve the GRFP in these and other respects (See also the list of GRFP alumni
highlighted by NSF featuring only three women and two persons of color:
https://www.nsfgrfp.org/resources/about_grfp/grfp_alumni).

There are many ways NSF US research priorities without perpetuating disparities
that exist for scholars at the beginning of their careers. We look forward to
this and all socitications by NSF meeting its vision for inclusive science in
the US and contributing to this vision.

## Signatories


|Name|Institution or Organization|Funded by NSF|GRFP Applicant/Awardee|Comments|
|----|---------------------------|-------------|----------------------|--------|
|test|test|test|test|test|
|test*|test|test|test|test|

* This individual is a co-author of this letter

To request an edit to this list email williams@cshl.edu

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License</a>.
